QP trie news roundup
====================

Firstly, I have to say that it's totally awesome that I am writing
this at all, and it's entirely due to the cool stuff done by people
other than me. Yes! News about other people doing cool stuff with my
half-baked ideas, how cool is that?


CZ.NIC Knot DNS
---------------

OK, DNS is approximately the ideal application for tries. It needs a
data structure with key/value lookup and lexically ordered traversal.

When qp tries were new, I got some very positive feedback from [Marek
Vavrusa](https://twitter.com/vavrusam) who I think was at CZ.NIC at
the time. As well as being the Czech DNS registry, they also develop
their own very competitive DNS server software. Clearly the potential
for a win there, but I didn't have time to push a side project to
production quality, nor any expectation that anyone else would do the
work.

But, in November I got email from Vladimír Čunát telling me he had
reimplemented qp tries to fix the portability bugs and missing features
(such as prefix searches) in my qp trie code, and added it to [Knot
DNS](https://www.knot-dns.cz). Knot was previously using a [HAT
trie](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HAT-trie).

Vladimír said [qp tries could reduce total server RSS by more than 50%
in a mass hosting test
case](https://gitlab.labs.nic.cz/labs/knot/merge_requests/574).
Although qp tries can be slower than HAT tries in some synthetic
benchmarks (more indirections due to checking a nybble per node rather
than a byte per node) this effect is too small to make a
non-negligible difference to Knot.

So, qp tries were a pretty good improvement. Thanks, Vladimír,
for making such effective use of my ideas!

(I've written some [notes on more memory-efficient DNS name lookups in
qp tries](http://dotat.at/prog/qp/notes-dns.html) in case anyone wants
to help make it even better...)


Rust
----

Shortly before Christmas I spotted that [Frank
Denis](https://twitter.com/jedisct1/) has [a qp trie implementation in
Rust](https://github.com/jedisct1/rust-qptrie)!

Sadly I'm still only appreciating Rust from a distance, but when I
find some time to try it out properly, this will be top of my list of
things to hack around with!

I think qp tries are an interesting test case for Rust, because at the
core of the data structure is a tightly packed two word `union` with
type tags tucked into the low order bits of a pointer. It is dirty
low-level C, but in principle it ought to work nicely as a Rust
`enum`, provided Rust can be persuaded to make the same layout
optimizations. In my head a qp trie is a parametric recursive
algebraic data type, and I wish there were a programming language with
which I could express that clearly.

So, thanks, Frank, for giving me an extra incentive to try out Rust!
Also, Frank's Twitter feed is ace, you should totally follow him.


Time vs space
-------------

Today I had a conversation on Twitter with
[@tef](https://twitter.com/tef_ebooks) who has some really interesting
ideas about possible improvements to qp tries.

One of the weaknesses of qp-tries, at least in my proof-of-concept
implementation, is the allocator is called for every insert or delete.
C's allocator is relatively heavyweight (compared to languages with
tightly-coupled GCs) so it's not great to call it so frequently.

([Bagwell's HAMT
paper](https://infoscience.epfl.ch/record/64398/files/idealhashtrees.pdf)
was a major inspiration for qp tries, and he goes into some detail
describing his custom allocator. It makes me feel like I'm slacking!)

There's an important trade-off between small memory size and keeping
some spare space to avoid `realloc()` calls. I have erred on the side of
optimizing for simple allocator calls and small data structure size at
the cost of greater allocator stress.

@tef suggested adding extra space to each node for use as a write
buffer, in a similar way to ["fractal tree"
indexes.](https://www.percona.com/files/presentations/percona-live/PLMCE2012/PLMCE2012-The_Right_Read_Optimization_is_Actually_Write_Optimization.pdf).
As well as avoiding calls to `realloc()`, a write buffer could avoid
malloc() calls for inserting new nodes. I was totally [nerd
sniped](https://xkcd.com/356/) by his cool ideas!

After some intensive thinking I worked out [a sketch of how write
buffers might amortize allocation in qp
tries](http://dotat.at/prog/qp/notes-write-buffer.html). I don't think
it quite matches what tef had in mind, but it's definitely intriguing.
It's *very* tempting to steal some time to turn the sketch into code,
but I fear I need to focus more on things that are directly helpful to
my colleagues...

Anyway, thanks, tef, for the inspiring conversation! It also,
tangentially, led me to write this item for my blog.
