How does a qp trie compare to a network routing trie?
=====================================================

You might remember back in October I described how [my qp trie is a
combination of djb's crit-bit tree and Bagwell's
HAMT](https://dotat.at/prog/qp/blog-2015-10-04.html). The extra cherry
on top of those ingredients was spotting that with the right layout in
memory, [qp trie traversal gets a big boost from cache
prefetching](https://dotat.at/prog/qp/blog-2015-10-11.html).

There are a lot of papers about doing routing table lookup using a
trie of some kind. So how do routing tries relate to qp tries?

Rather than general-purpose data structures, the literature has a lot
of application-specific tries designed just for routing. And rather
than software, they are often tuned for implementation in hardware.

There are a couple of examples below; the tl;dr is that they are more
like the un-hashed variant of Bagwell's HAMT than like qp tries, since
they don't have the PATRICIA / crit-bit trick of omitting nodes with
one child.

citations
---------

In August 2015, a couple of months before my qp trie work, a paper
titled [Poptrie: a compressed trie with population count for fast and
scalable software IP routing table
lookup](http://conferences.sigcomm.org/sigcomm/2015/pdf/papers/p57.pdf)
was presented at the ACM SIGCOMM conference.

The Poptrie paper cites a paper titled [Tree Bitmap: hardware/software
IP lookups with incremental
updates](http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=997160) published in April
2004 and sadly paywalled.

[Getting less relevant, the Tree Bitmap paper frequently compares its
data structure with the "Lulea" one described in [small forwarding
tables for fast routing
lookups](http://conferences.sigcomm.org/sigcomm/1997/papers/p192.pdf)
(SIGCOMM 1997). That one is worth noting as an earlier non-HAMT-like
structure.]

why poptrie is more like a HAMT than qp trie
--------------------------------------------

I found the poptrie paper *after* I thought up the qp trie, when
trying to choose a name for it that wasn't already taken. Algorithm 1
in that paper is very similar to the qp trie inner loop; the crit-bit
difference is that in a poptrie the bit offset into the key has a
fixed step per loop iteration (like a HAMT), whereas in a qp trie the
offset is loaded from the node so it can skip ahead arbitrarily.

Another HAMT similarity occurs in section 3.4 of the poptrie paper,
which describes using a jumbo node at the root of the trie to reduce
the number of indirections. I have not tried implementing a qp trie
with this feature.

string keys vs routing tables
-----------------------------

The HAMT-like lack of PATRICIA-style skipping in a routing trie is one
aspect of a pervasive structural difference due to the different kinds
of data.

A qp trie stores a relatively sparse set of strings. In any trie most
of the possible strings you might try to look up will not be found.
Strings are variable length. And strings are prefix-free - a short
string will not be a prefix of a longer one if you include its '\0'
terminator.

A routing trie stores a dense set of address prefixes. Every address
you look up will produce an answer - the lack of a route is handled at
a higher level. Address prefixes have a limited set of possible
lengths. And routing tables are not prefix-free: you often have a
route for a large address range (short prefix) with a more specific
route for a smaller address range (longer prefix) that carves a chunk
out of it.

other significant differences
-----------------------------

The sparse/dense string/route difference means that the qp trie inner
loop has a three-way decision (fail to find anything; find a leaf; go
down another branch) whereas a routing trie has a two-way decision
(leaf or branch).

The lack of prefix-freedom means a routing trie needs a different
compression approach than a qp trie. Section 3.3 of the poptrie paper
has details of their version; one consequence is that a poptrie node
has two bitmaps and two child pointers for leaves and branches,
whereas an HAMT node or a qp trie node has one bitmap and one pointer
for both.

I think poptries would benefit from prefetching like qp tries and
HAMTs, but the poptrie paper doesn't mention it. However the Tree
Bitmap paper *does* talk about doing bitmap and index calculations
while waiting for a memory fetch.

conclusion and further work
---------------------------

Obviously this was nothing like a proper literature search so there
are certainly other papers covering similar ground. I would be
interested in pointers to other literature in this area!
